---
title: Lab 16
asg: Mergesort & Quicksort
permalink: /lab16/
---

On this page:  
✔️ [Motivation](#motivation)  
✔️ [Background Info](#bgi)  
✔️ [Your Task](#task)  
✔️ [Requirements](#reqs)  
✔️ [Handing in](#submit)  
✔️ [Grade Breakdown](#grading)  

#### Motivation (Why are we doing this?) {#motivation}
This lab will help you solidify your understanding of mergesort and quicksort.

---

#### Background Info {#bgi}
This lab was designed by a fellow undergrad to solidify your understanding of quicksort and mergesort. There are embedded hints throughout the code, as well as links to additional resources. Please read his comments closely.

>  Please refer to the course material ([slides](/sm21/slides) and [readings](/sm21/wk6)) as needed.

---

#### Your Task {#task}
Complete the implementation of the sorting algorithms in `lab16.cpp`. Pay attention to the **hints in the code**.

1. Download the files below (it's easiest if you right click and then choose download or save)

    [lab16.h](/sm21/labs/lab16/template-code/lab16.h)
    : Contains the **declaration** of the lab you'll be implementing. **Do not** alter any of the given function signatures. **Curious about the static keyword?** [Read about it](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/static-keyword-cpp/).

    [lab16.cpp](/sm21/labs/lab16/template-code/lab16.cpp)
    : Contains the **definition** of the lab you'll be implementing.

    [test.cpp](/sm21/labs/lab16/template-code/test.cpp)
    : Contains some tests that should pass as soon as you finish your implementation. **You should add your own test cases to this file**.

    [doctest.h](/sm21/labs/lab16/template-code/doctest.h)
    : The library we'll be using for our own automated tester. There's a ton of code in here so don't worry too much about understanding everything it does-- just know the library is extremely powerful and we'll only be scratching the surface of everything it can do. **Do not edit this file**.

2. Once you have downloaded all the files, inspect them. Ask questions if you have them.
3. Create your own makefile to compile and run your program. Refer to [Lab 3](/sm21/lab03) as needed.
4. Complete the implementation of the sorting algorithms in `lab16.cpp`. Pay attention to the **hints in the code**. Refer to the course material (slides and readings) as needed.
5. Add your own test cases.
6. Run, compile, and test your program by running `make` in your terminal, while in the directory all these files are located in.
7. In a separate file called `analysis.txt` determine and explain the time complexity of `merge()` and `partition()` in terms of `low` and `high`.

---

#### Requirements {#reqs}

Your submission will be **tested and graded by an autograder**, for this reason it cannot be stressed enough that your program must **exactly** follow the assignment specifications:    

1. All sorting functions work as expected.
2. Big-O analysis of `merge()` and `partition()` correctly defined and explained (graded manually).

---

#### Handing in {#submit}
To submit your solution to Gradescope, select **all of the following files** and use the *drag and drop* option:
- lab16.h
- lab16.cpp
- test.cpp
- analysis.txt

---

#### Grade Breakdown {#grading}
You must successfully meet [requirements](#reqs) **1 through 2** in order to receive credit for this assignment.

> To receive any credit at all, you **must abide by our [Collaboration and Academic Honesty Policy](/sm21/policies/#integrity)**. Failure to do so may result in a failing grade in the class and/or further disciplinary action.

---

Assignment hints and template code brought to you by Evan Russell.